---
title: "Enrique Vila-Matas"
draft: false
date: 2011-09-08T04:24:00-04:00
last_name: "Vila-Matas"
contributor_type:
image_path:
image_credit:
featured_image_path:
_slug: enrique-vila-matas
---

Enrique Vila-Matas was born in Barcelona in 1948. He studied law and journalism, and in 1968 became a columnist for the magazine _Film Frames_. In 1970 he directed two short films, _All Young People Grieve_ and _End of Summer._ In 1971, he performed military service in Melilla, where in the back of a military grocer’s shop he wrote his first book, _Women in the Mirror Contemplating the Landscape._ On his return to Barcelona, he worked as a film critic for magazines _Bocaccio_ and _Destiny_. For two years he lived in Paris and rented an attic that was once rented by the writer Marguerite Duras; there he wrote his second novel, _The Illustrated Killer_. His third and fourth books, _South of the Eyelids_ and _Never Am Going to the Movies_, appeared in 1980 and 1982, but were only promoted in 1985 with his book _The Abbreviated Laptop History of Literature_. He then published _Forever Suicides_, and _Children without Children_, two books of short stories. Then he moved on to the romantic genre with works such as _Far from Veracruz_, _Strange Life Form_, _The Vertical Travel_, _Bartleby and Company_, and _Mountain Sickness_ among others. In 1992, he published a collection of articles and essays _The Slower Passenger_, followed by a second collection in 1995, _The Sunday Suit_. Other books that contain literary essays: _To End the Round Numbers_ (1998), _From the City Nervosa_ (2000), _Strange Laboratory Notebooks_ (2003, published in Venezuela) _Although Not Understanding Anything_ (2003, published in Chile), _The Light Wind in Parma_ (2004, published in Mexico, reprinted in 2008 in Spain), and _Pasavento Was No Longer_ (2008, published in Argentina). He wrote about his experience in Paris: _Paris is Not Just Never_ (Barcelona, 2003). In 2005 he published _Doctor Pasavento_ which revolves around the theme of the disappearance and "the difficulty of not being anybody." The book closes his trilogy _Metaliteraria on the Pathologies of Writing_ (_Bartleby_, _Montano_, _Pasavento_). In September 2007, he returns to the story published in Anagrama "Explorers of the abyss." In 2008 he published "Dietari Fickle", which increasingly favors a formula that blurs the boundaries between fiction, essays and biographies. The book is a journal or kind of literary guide that allows glimpses of the internal architecture of his work and combines the experience of reading with the experiences of life, personal memory and the ideas of a literary essayist. He is a Knight of the Legion of Honor from France. He has won the prize city of Barcelona and the Romulo Gallegos (2001), the Prix du Meilleur Livre Étranger and Fernando Aguirre-Libralire (2002), the Herralde prize, the National Critics, the Prix Medicis-étranger, the prize of Critics Circle Chile (2003), the Premio Internazionale Ennio Flaiano (2006), José Manuel Lara Foundation Award 2006, the prize of the Royal Spanish Academy 2006. In September 2007 he won the literary prize Elsa Morante Scrittori del Mondo, which rewards "to an important foreign author."

